WEAKLY NONLINEAR ANALYSIS OF MINIMAL MODELS FOR TURING PATTERNS

F.R. Waters, C.A. Yates, J.H.P. Dawes
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Bath, Claverton Down, BA2 7AY, UK
Centre for Mathematical Biology, University of Bath, Claverton Down, BA2 7AY, UK

Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 471 (2025) 134427

================================================================================
ABSTRACT
================================================================================

The simplest particle-based mass-action models for Turing instability – i.e. 
those with only two component species undergoing instantaneous interactions of 
at most two particles, with the smallest number of distinct interactions – fall 
into a surprisingly small number of classes of reaction schemes. In previous 
work we have computed this classification, with different schemes distinguished 
by the structure of the interactions. Within a given class the reaction 
stoichiometry and rates remain as parameters that determine the linear and 
nonlinear evolution of the system.

Adopting the usual weakly nonlinear scalings and analysis reveals that, under 
suitable choices of reaction stoichiometry, and in nine of the 11 classes of 
minimal scheme exhibiting a spatially in-phase ("true activator-inhibitor") 
Turing instability, stable patterns are indeed generated in open regions of 
parameter space via a generically supercritical bifurcation from the spatially 
uniform state. In three of these classes the instability is always supercritical 
while in six there is an open region in which it is subcritical. Intriguingly, 
however, in the remaining two classes of minimal scheme we require different 
weakly nonlinear scalings, since the coefficient in the usual cubic normal form 
unexpectedly vanishes identically. In these cases, a different set of asymptotic 
scalings is required.

We present a complete analysis through deriving the normal form for these two 
cases also, which involves quintic terms. This fifth-order normal form also 
captures the behaviour along the boundaries between the supercritical and 
subcritical cases of the cubic normal form. The details of these calculations 
reveal the distinct roles played by reaction rate parameters as compared to 
stoichiometric parameters.

We quantitatively validate our analysis via numerical simulations and confirm 
the two different scalings for the amplitude of predicted stable patterned states.

================================================================================
1. INTRODUCTION
================================================================================

Since the highly-cited initial exploration by Alan Turing [1], there has been 
huge interest, across many scientific fields, in understanding mechanisms for 
the spontaneous emergence, out of homogeneous equilibrium states, of structure 
and spatial patterns. The emergence of structure from spatial uniformity has 
been particularly relevant in biological science where it is motivated, as 
Turing's original work was, by the challenge of understanding the origin of 
structure in embryology and related areas of development. Classic textbook 
surveys of pattern formation from various perspectives include [2–5].

On the mathematical side, much of this work has made use of a relatively small 
number of model equations which have attained a canonical status in the field; 
for example the Gierer–Meinhardt [6], Brusselator [7], Schnakenberg [8], and 
Gray-Scott [9] models of reaction–diffusion dynamics. It is noteworthy that the 
latter three of these models all contain cubic-order reaction terms, which would 
most parsimoniously be interpreted as describing the simultaneous interaction of 
three particles, despite this being intrinsically extremely unlikely and 
non-generic in a physical sense.

Our work focuses on the exploration and analysis of the simplest possible 
reaction schemes that contain only generic interaction terms, i.e those that 
contain only zeroth, first and second order reactions that correspond in 
mean-field PDE models to constant, linear, and quadratic terms, respectively.

In previous work [12] we established that quadratic polynomial reaction terms 
between two species, labelled U and V, with no separation of time scales and 
Fickian diffusion, can be sufficient for a homogeneous steady state to exist 
and to satisfy the conditions required for a linear instability with a preferred 
wavenumber that is positive, i.e. a 'Turing instability'. Such reaction dynamics 
are readily interpretable as arising from elementary reactions (i.e. reactions 
between at most two particles) under the assumption of mass-action kinetics.

In [12], we computed the complete set of two-species mass-action reaction 
schemes that can exhibit Turing instability and which use the smallest possible 
number of elementary reactions. This analysis revealed that there was a 
fundamental difference between reaction schemes which could generate patterns in 
which the concentrations of the two chemical species fluctuated spatially in 
phase with each other (type-I) and those in which the two concentrations were 
spatially in antiphase (type-II). Minimal reaction schemes for type-I patterns 
contain only three reactions, whereas minimal reaction schemes for type-II 
patterns necessarily contain four reactions.

In this paper we develop this analysis further by considering the weakly 
nonlinear development of the linear instabilities previously identified. To be 
precise, we present here a complete analysis of the weakly nonlinear development 
of Turing instabilities for the type-I minimal reaction schemes, in one spatial 
dimension. Each scheme comprises a bi-particulate autocatalytic reaction of one 
species, 2U → ..., an inter-specific reaction U+V → ... which reduces the count 
of one or both species, and some third reaction.

Our major conclusion is that we are able to show that all of these type-I 
reaction schemes, under certain conditions, are able to support stable, spatially 
periodic patterns that arise from the Turing instability: i.e. that for each 
type-I reaction scheme there exists an open region in parameter space, in which 
the instability will result in a stable patterned state that lies close to the 
species concentrations attained in the spatially uniform equilibrium.

Our results allow a number of interesting conclusions to be drawn. First, we 
find that two cases, labelled in [12] as c and d, are unexpectedly degenerate 
in their nonlinear behaviour. Turning to the other nine classes, a general 
conclusion is that the pattern forming instability is supercritical if the 
(pseudo-)reaction 2U → n₁U + m₁V produces a sufficiently large number of 
particles of U compared to the number of particles of V that are produced, i.e. 
n₁ is sufficiently large compared to m₁. We express it in terms of the ratio of 
stoichiometric coefficients ω₁ := m₁/(n₁ - 2).

Finally, in cases in which the nature of the instability is not determined as 
expected at third order, more complicated analyses suggest that the reaction 
schemes are still able to sustain stable periodic patterns near the onset of the 
instability.

================================================================================
1. PROBLEM SPECIFICATION
================================================================================

Under the usual assumptions of Fickian diffusion and mass-action reaction 
kinetics, the general PDE system for a reaction–diffusion system is

    (u_t)   =  (D₁  0 ) ∇²(u)  +  (F(u,v))
    (v_t)      (0  D₂)    (v)     (G(u,v))                             (1)

where u(x,t), v(x,t) are the concentrations of two species, D₁, D₂ > 0 are the 
species' diffusivities, F and G are, for the reasons outlined above, restricted 
to be quadratic polynomials, and the subscript t denotes the partial derivative 
with respect to t. We suppose that Eq. (1) supports a spatially uniform steady 
state (u*, v*).

By nondimensionalising and rescaling about this state, we obtain the following 
coupled PDEs for the (scaled) perturbations (U, V) to the homogeneous steady 
state:

    (U_t)   =  {(1  0 ) ∇²  +  ( 1   -μ )} (U)  +  N̂ ( ½U²  )
    (V_t)      (0  δ)         ( μ   -ϑ )   (V)      ( UV   )           (2)
                                                     ( ½V²  )

where δ := D₂/D₁, and from our assumption on the signs of the entries of the 
Jacobian J*, we see that ϑ is necessarily positive. We observe that the sign of 
μ corresponds to the type of Turing instability the system may undergo: if μ > 0 
then concentration maxima of one species coincide with those of the other species 
(type-I). If μ < 0, then concentration maxima of one species coincide with minima 
of the other species (type-II). We analyse this governing PDE system (2) for U, V 
in one spatial dimension.

1.1. Linearised analysis

Neglecting the nonlinear terms in Eq. (2), by the Routh–Hurwitz stability 
criteria, the uniform steady state U = V = 0 is linearly stable to spatially-
independent perturbations if and only if

    ϑ > 1  and  μ² > ϑ                                                  (3)

Making the usual Fourier mode ansatz (U, V) ∝ exp(λt+ikx), under the 
linearisation we obtain the dispersion relation for λ(k²):

    λ² + ((1 + δ)k² - (1 - ϑ))λ + (δk⁴ - (δ - ϑ)k² + μ² - ϑ) = 0    (4)

The linearised temporal growth rate Re(λ(k²)) for a given wave number k is 
positive if and only if

    δk⁴ - (δ - ϑ)k² + μ² - ϑ < 0                                      (5)

From the constraint (3) that μ² > ϑ, there exist values of k that satisfy 
inequality (5) if and only if

    δ > ϑ  and  (δ - ϑ)² > 4δ(μ² - ϑ)

which are satisfied simultaneously for some δ if and only if δ > δ₀ where

    δ₀ := (|μ| + √(μ² - ϑ))²

The 'critical' wavenumber k_c – corresponding to the first unstable wavemode as 
δ increases past δ₀ – is therefore given by

    k²_c = (δ₀ - ϑ)/(2δ₀)                                              (6)

and has linearised growth rate

    λ(k²_c) = (k²_c)/(δ₀ - 1)(δ - δ₀) + O((δ - δ₀)²)                 (7)

If δ > δ₀, then the interval (k₋, k₊) of wavenumbers for which the growth rate 
λ is positive is defined by

    k± := k_c ± √[(1 - k²_c/(4δ₀))](δ - δ₀)^(1/2) + O(δ - δ₀)       (8)

Thus, as we expect for steady-state pattern formation problems where the 
dispersion relation has a locally quadratic maximum, if δ - δ₀ = O(ε²) where 
ε > 0 is small, then the characteristic growth rate of the critical instability 
mode is O(ε²), while the width of the band of unstable wavenumbers is O(ε).

================================================================================
2. WEAKLY NONLINEAR ANALYSIS
================================================================================

To explore the weakly nonlinear behaviour of the system close to the Turing 
instability threshold, we let δ = δ₀ + δ₂ε² for some small parameter ε > 0. In 
line with the scalings noted at the end of the previous section, we anticipate 
that the generic weakly nonlinear dynamics will evolve on the slow time scale 
T = ε²t, and long length scale X = εx. We consider T and X to be formally 
independent of t and x, and look for solutions U(x, X, T), V(x, X, T) to the 
governing Eq. (2) that are independent of the fast time scale t.

We now propose an asymptotic expansion

    (U)  =  ε(U₁)  +  ε²(U₂)  +  ε³(U₃)  + ...
    (V)     (V₁)      (V₂)      (V₃)

and solve Eq. (9) for the amplitudes (U_j, V_j) order-by-order.

2.1. Solution at order ε

At leading order, we recover the linear problem:

    0 = L(U₁)
         (V₁)

and for a non-zero leading order solution, we deduce that (U₁, V₁) must have 
short length scale dependence exp(±ik_cx), such that it lies in the kernel of L. 
Thus we have an eigenvector problem

    L₁(U₁)  =  0  ⟹  (U₁)  =  (a + ā)η
      (V₁)            (V₁)

where η is the right-eigenvector of L₁ with eigenvalue 0:

    η := (     -μ      )
         (-(1 - k²_c)  )

and a(x, X, T) = exp(ik_cx)A(X, T) where A(X, T) is a complex-valued amplitude. 
We use overbars to denote complex conjugate. We also define ξ to be the left-
eigenvector of L₁ with eigenvalue 0:

    ξ := (      μ      )
         (-(1 - k²_c)  )

and we note, intriguingly that ξ^T and η satisfy conditions involving, 
separately, the diffusion and reaction terms:

    ξ^T(1   0 )η  =  ξ^T( 1   -μ)η  =  0                            (11)
       (0  δ₀)           ( μ   -ϑ)

2.2. Solution at order ε²

Retaining only the next-to-leading order terms from Eq. (9), and substituting in 
the leading-order solution (10), we find

    L(U₂)  =  -2ik_c(a_X - ā_X)(1   0 )η - (|a|² + ½(a² + ā²))Mη    (12)
     (V₂)                      (0  δ₀)

where the 2 × 2 matrix M is most compactly written as the product of the 2 × 3 
matrix N of coefficients of the nonlinear terms and a 3 × 2 matrix:

    M := N(    -μ          0       )
          (-(1 - k²_c)    -μ       )                                 (13)
          (     0      -(1 - k²_c) )

The solution components w⁽⁰⁾, w⁽²⁾ are determined uniquely since L₀ and L₂ are 
invertible. The solution is:

    (U₂)  =  -2ik_c(a_X - ā_X)ζ - |a|²L⁻¹₀Mη - ½(a² + ā²)L⁻¹₂Mη      (14)
    (V₂)

where ζ is defined such that L₁ζ = (1   0 )η
                                    (0  δ₀)

2.3. Solution at order ε³

At the next order, we obtain terms with a long time derivative ∂_T, and we may 
obtain an evolution equation for the amplitude A(X, T). The solvability condition 
yields:

    (δ₀ - 1)/k²_c A_T = 4δ₀/(1 - k²_c) A_XX + δ₂A - K/(k²_c(1 - k²_c)²) A|A|²  (15)

where the coefficient K is defined to be

    K := -ξ^TM(L⁻¹₀ + ½L⁻¹₂)Mη

Scaling our variables appropriately, we obtain the real Ginzburg–Landau equation

    A_T = A_XX + δ₂A - KA|A|²                                        (16)

If A is independent of the long-lengthscale X, this reduces to the Stuart–Landau 
equation

    A_T = δ₂A - KA|A|²

If K > 0, then stable stripe pattern solutions with |A| = (δ₂/K)^(1/2) are 
expected to bifurcate from the linearly unstable zero amplitude solution for 
δ₂ > 0 (the Turing instability regime), while if K < 0 then linearly unstable 
stripe patterns bifurcate away from the linearly stable zero solution and exist 
in the region δ₂ < 0. In the latter, 'subcritical', case, it is possible that 
the branches of patterned solutions will turn around in parameter space, through 
saddle–node bifurcations, resulting in stable patterned states that exist on 
both sides of the bifurcation point.

================================================================================
3. THE SIGN OF K
================================================================================

After some algebraic rearrangement, presented in detail in Appendix A, we can 
write K as

    K = -(5/6) (ξ^TMη)/(δ₀k²_c) (19/15 (ξ^TMη)/(k²_c(1-k²_c)) + δ₀M₁₁ + M₂₂) (17)

where M_ij denotes the (i,j)th entry of the matrix M. Thus K is positive if (and 
only if) either

    δ₀M₁₁ + M₂₂ > -(19/15) (ξ^TMη)/(k²_c(1-k²_c)) > 0                (18a)

or

    δ₀M₁₁ + M₂₂ < -(19/15) (ξ^TMη)/(k²_c(1-k²_c)) < 0                (18b)

and we note that K can vanish if (and only if) either

    ξ^TMη = 0

or

    ξ^TMη = -(15/19) k²_c(1 - k²_c)(δ₀M₁₁ + M₂₂)

In our previous work [12], we derived a complete classification of minimal mass-
action reaction schemes that can exhibit Turing instability. Now, having 
presented the weakly nonlinear analysis in Section 2, we can explore directly 
the weakly nonlinear development of the Turing instability.

For our minimal type-I schemes, it turns out that sign(K) is independent of the 
values of the reaction rate parameters. We focus our attention here on these 
classes of minimal scheme and present details of all 11 minimal type-I classes.

For each class we can show that inequality (18b) is the relevant condition 
determining the sign of K, i.e. δ₀M₁₁ + M₂₂ < 0 < ξ^TMη for all choices of 
stoichiometry which permit Turing instability, and thus K is positive if and 
only if inequality (18b) holds.

Intriguingly we find that for classes c and d it is the case that ξ^TMη = 0 for 
any choice of reaction stoichiometry and rate parameters such that Turing 
instability occurs, and so K ≡ 0. This is due to a particular degeneracy of the 
nonlinear terms and is explored in detail in Section 3.2.

In all cases this can be simplified to an inequality involving only ratios of 
the stoichiometric effects of each reaction on each species. To this end, we 
will express the results in terms of the variables ω_i = |m_i - q_i|/|n_i - p_i| 
and ϖ_i = |n_i - p_i|/|m_i - q_i| as appropriate.

We summarise the results in Figs. 1 and 2. In classes e, i and k we find that K 
is sign definite. In other classes sign(K) is a particularly simple function of 
ω_i, in others we defer to numerical evaluation.

[The paper continues with detailed analysis of each class a through k, followed 
by sections on special cases where K=0, numerical simulations, and conclusions. 
The full mathematical details and appendices follow.]

================================================================================
7. CONCLUSIONS
================================================================================

In this paper we have built directly on our previous work [12] and explored the 
weakly nonlinear development of the pattern-forming instability that these eleven 
classes of PDE all, by construction, exhibit. Curiously, almost every model 
reaction–diffusion system commonly used in the literature is implicitly much more 
complicated than the 11 classes explored here which all correspond to minimal 
(i.e. comprising only three individual chemical reactions and two species) 
schemes, within which each chemical reaction is either zeroth, first or second 
order.

We have shown here that these reaction–diffusion systems with quadratic reaction 
dynamics can be sufficient, at least as far as formal weakly nonlinear analysis 
demonstrates, to exhibit stable Turing patterns. The weakly nonlinear analysis 
enables us to predict quantitatively the steady state amplitude of patterns, at 
least sufficiently close to the Turing instability threshold, and we provide 
verification of this for periodic patterns that have the critical wavenumber k_c.

Our main conclusions are as follows:

1. Each of the 11 classes of type-I reaction scheme is able to produce small 
amplitude stable patterns, as long as suitable stoichiometric coefficients are 
chosen. Of particular interest is that the pattern forming instability is 
supercritical when the ratio of stoichiometric coefficients ω₁ := m₁/(n₁ - 2) 
in the reaction 2U → n₁U + m₁V is sufficiently small. Hence a higher level of 
autocatalytic activity within this reaction serves to produce more supercritical 
pattern forming behaviour.

2. We draw attention to the highly degenerate nature of classes c and d, in 
which all nonlinear terms contain factors of U. The degenerate nature of the 
weakly nonlinear analysis in these cases appears not to have been noted before, 
and appears to be quite subtle.

3. Analysis of the boundary cases (within classes a, b, f, g, h, and j) in which 
the pattern forming instability switches from being supercritical to being 
subcritical shows that the higher-order terms that appear here have a 
stabilising effect on the instability, so that even in regions of parameter 
space where the instability is subcritical (i.e. K < 0) we might expect that 
stable patterns at larger amplitudes exist.

One important application of these results will be in the study of stochastic 
reaction–diffusion systems. For an individual-based model of a scheme of 
reactions, each of which involves at most two particles, the mean-field 
approximation to the dynamics yields a PDE system (1). Our work here opens the 
way for a systematic analysis of so-called 'stochastic Turing patterns' in these 
systems in comparison to deterministic Turing patterns predictable in the mean 
field.

================================================================================
REFERENCES
================================================================================

[1] A.M. Turing, The chemical basis of morphogenesis, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 
    B 237 (1952) 37–72.

[2] J.D. Murray, Mathematical Biology II: Spatial Models and Biomedical 
    Applications, third ed., Springer, New York, N.Y., 2003.

[3] R. Hoyle, Pattern Formation: An Introduction to Methods, Cambridge 
    University Press, Cambridge, 2006.

[4] M.C. Cross, H. Greenside, Pattern Formation and Dynamics in Nonequilibrium 
    Systems, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2009.

[5] L.M. Pismen, Patterns and Interfaces in Dissipative Dynamics, second ed., 
    Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 2023.

[6] A. Gierer, H. Meinhardt, A theory of biological pattern formation, 
    Kybernetik 12 (1) (1972) 30–39.

[7] I. Prigogine, R. Lefever, Symmetry breaking instabilities in dissipative 
    systems. II, J. Chem. Phys. 48 (4) (1968) 1695–1700.

[8] J. Schnakenberg, Simple chemical reaction systems with limit cycle behaviour, 
    J. Theoret. Biol. 81 (3) (1979) 389–400.

[9] P. Gray, S.K. Scott, Sustained oscillations and other exotic patterns of 
    behavior in isothermal reactions, J. Phys. Chem. 89 (1) (1985) 22–32.

[10] S.A. Levin, L.A. Segel, Hypothesis for origin of planktonic patchiness, 
     Nature 259 (5545) (1976) 659.

[11] T.E. Woolley, A.L. Krause, E.A. Gaffney, Bespoke turing systems, Bull. Math. 
     Biol. 83 (5) (2021) 41.

[12] F.R. Waters, C.A. Yates, J.H.P. Dawes, Minimal reaction schemes for pattern 
     formation, J. R. Soc. Interface 21 (211) (2024) 20230490.

[Additional references 13-25 continue in similar format...]

================================================================================
END OF DOCUMENT
================================================================================